Adds dataLanguage property to the replacement <pre> element. (#10538)
withastro/astro: .changeset/cold-snakes-train.md

---
"@astrojs/markdown-remark": minor
---

Adds a `data-language` attribute on the rendered `pre` elements to expose the highlighted syntax language.

> For example, the following markdown fenced-codeblock will expose `data-language="python"`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following Markdown code block will expose `data-language="python"`:
```

```
\```python
def func():
    print('Hello Astro!')
\```
```

> This allows retrieving the language in a rehype plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows retrieving the language in a rehype plugin from `node.properties.dataLanguage` by accessing the `<pre>` element using `{ tagName: "pre" }`:
```
Would this be the correct way to say this? I'd like to be able to call attention to the significant parts of the example.

Reviewer 2: Sounds right.

```js
// myRehypePre.js
import { visit } from "unist-util-visit";
export default function myRehypePre() {
  return (tree) => {
    visit(tree, { tagName: "pre" }, (node) => {
      const lang = node.properties.dataLanguage;
      [...]
    });
  };
}
```

> Note: if using the built-in `<Code>` component, the output of the component being flattened html, the replacement `<pre>` cannot be accessed using `{ tagName: "pre" }`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: if using the built-in `<Code>` component, the output of the component being flattened HTML, the replacement `<pre>` cannot be accessed using `{ tagName: "pre" }`.
```

> Note: if using the built-in `<Code>` component, the output of the component being flattened html, the replacement `<pre>` cannot be accessed using `{ tagName: "pre" }`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The `<pre>` element is not exposed when using Astro's `<Code />` component which outputs flattened HTML.
```
I think we could keep this shorter here, especially since I called attention to `{ tagName: "pre" }` before the code snippet!

"outputs"? "produces"? "renders"?

> It also allows to use the `data-language` attribute in css rules:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It also allows the use of the `data-language` attribute in CSS rules:
```

> It also allows to use the `data-language` attribute in css rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `data-language` attribute may also be used in css rules:
```

---
"@astrojs/markdown-remark": minor
---

> Adds a `data-language` attribute on the rendered `pre` and `code` elements to expose the highlighted syntax language

Reviewer 2: can you add a usage example?

> Adds a `data-language` attribute on the rendered `pre` and `code` elements to expose the highlighted syntax language

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
Adds a `data-language` attribute on the rendered `pre` and `code` elements to expose the highlighted syntax language.

This allows retrieving the language in a rehype plugin:

```js
// myRehypePre.js
import { visit } from "unist-util-visit";
export default function myRehypePre() {
  return (tree) => {
    visit(tree, { tagName: "pre" }, (node) => {
      const lang = node.properties.dataLanguage;
      [...]
    });
  };
}
```
``````

Hi @604qgc ! I was thinking of including something like this in the changeset, since for minor releases of new features we do like to show them off a bit and really help people understand why your thing is cool! :nail_care: 

I took this from your PR description, but if there's something else you'd prefer to use, or would change this in some way, please do! I think a changeset of this style/length is helpful to people to understand the new feature, so anything like this you can suggest would be great.
